feat: 0.24 sleep mode docs update (#497)
loft-sh/vcluster-docs: vcluster/configure/vcluster-yaml/sleep-mode.mdx

import InstallCli from '../../_partials/deploy/install-cli.mdx';

<ProAdmonition />

# Sleep mode

Not all workloads need to run all the time, and scaling them down saves time and money. With sleep mode you can scale down workloads based on a set schedule, or activity from users and ingress.

:::warning
Sleep mode is intended for pre-production use cases only, and comes with some limitations and
caveats when used on a stand alone vCluster that is not connected to [the Platform](../../../../platform/use-platform/virtual-clusters/key-features/sleep-mode).
:::

## Enable sleep mode

To enable sleep mode, use the following configuration inside your `vcluster.yaml`:

```yaml title="sleep mode configuration"
sleepMode:
  enabled: true
  autoSleep:
    afterInactivity: 1h
```

## How it works

### Sleep mode operations

Sleep mode performs two main operations:

**Sleeping**
Deletes bare pods and scales down the following resources:
- Deployments
- ReplicaSets
- ReplicationControllers
- DaemonSets

**Waking**

- Scales resources back to their original state
- Cannot restore previously deleted bare pods

### Resource exemption

> Resources can be exempted from sleep mode using either:

Reviewer: Nit: remove either as it's more than 2 things:
```suggestion
Resources can be exempted from sleep mode by:
```
Could also say "any of the following" or something

- Adding the annotation `sleepmode.loft.sh/exclude: true`

> - Configuring `sleepMode` with specific labels

Reviewer: Is there a link or section, or an example you could refer to here ?

> - Adding configured labels to workloads that should keep running

Reviewer: What's the difference between this and the first one ? Besides being labels vs annotations.

## Detecting activity

To wake a sleeping cluster or to update the last active time, sleep mode captures the following:

- Access of cluster resources through API calls (e.g., `kubectl get <resource>`)
- Attempts to contact Ingress endpoints (NGINX only)

:::note
Ingress activity detection is only available for [NGINX](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/tree/main)
ingress controllers, making use of the [mirror-target](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/blob/main/docs/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations.md#mirror)
annotation.  This has the effect of overwriting any previously set mirror-target annotation.
:::

> ### Ignoring other types of activity

Reviewer: Nice!

| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-ingresses" | ignore requests to associated ingresses  | "true" OR "false"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-groups" | ignore requests with a specific apigroup | "apps,group2,group3" |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resources" | ignore requests to specific resource types  | "pods,resource2,resource3"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-verbs" | ignore requests with specific verbs | "create,verb1,verb2"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resource-verbs" | ignore requests with specific verbs to specific resources |  "myresource.mygroup=create update delete, myresource2.mygroup=create update" |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resource-names" | ignore requests to specific resources with specific names | "myresource.mygroup=name1 name2,myotherresource.mygroup=name1"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-user-agents" | ignore specific useragents with trailling wildcard support | "kubectl*,argo,useragent3"  |

:::note
These annotations are to be added to the vCluster workload, e.g. the `StatefulSet` or `Deployment` running the virtual cluster, and any request can be ignored dynamically by adding the header `X-Sleep-Mode-Ignore`.
:::

## Differences and compatibility with the platform

> The documentation on this page describes sleep mode for a vCluster without an agent, where workloads are scaled down, but the control plane remains active to monitor for activity that should wake it up.

Reviewer: I would pivot this to instead describe the two ways it could run, something like: 
```suggestion
The documentation on this page describes two primary methods for sleep mode. The first is without an agent, where workloads are scaled down, but the control plane remains active to monitor for activity that should wake it up. And second... (sentence below) 
```
Because this page is really about both ways

When a vCluster is connected to the platform via an agent, the agent can fully shut down the control plane, reducing resource usage further. Additionally, auto-deletion is only available when an agent is present.

### Connecting to the platform

When a vCluster, configured for sleep mode, is connected to the platform, it ceases trying to manage its own sleep mode actions, allowing the agent to take over.
This requires compatible versions between vCluster and platform. Below is a table of compatibility and additional steps needed to be performed when installing or uninstalling an agent

> with sleep mode configured.

Reviewer: Can you clarify what "an agent with sleep mode configured" means ? Isn't it all configured in the vcluster config yaml. Or do you mean one configured with `external.platform`.

Author: I'll just remove that last part. You're right that that does sound like its talking about the agent having sleep mode configured.  What I meant was something more like "If sleep mode is configured there are additional steps you need to perform when installing or uninstalling an agent." I think sleep mode being configured can be assumed here though.

<br/>

| vCluster Version | Platform Version | Compatibility |  Installing an agent | Uninstalling an agent |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| 0.22.x | 4.2.x | ✅ | Manually update vCluster config, moving it from `experimental` to `external.platform`. Translate any durations like `90m` into equivalent seconds e.g. `5400`.  Schema validation prevents configuring both at the same time. | Configuration needs to be manual reverted. |
| 0.23.x | 4.2.x | ✅ | Manually update vCluster config, moving it from `experimental` to `external.platform`. Translate any durations like `90m` into equivalent seconds e.g. `5400`.  Schema validation prevents configuring both at the same time. | Configuration needs to be manual reverted. |

> | 0.24.0 | &lt;4.3.0 | ❌ | These versions are not compatible, as the vCluster version is ahead of the platform, causing the vcluster creation to be rejected.   | N/A |

Reviewer: Following up from my question about config from about, in what cases would it be rejected ? Is it only when `external.platform` is configured ? 
It's not a blanket rejection for all cases right, that would be bad, it should be possible to  run 0.24 with 4.2 something. Though it makes sense that full sleep wouldn't work in this scenario, but I was assuming that was still possible to configure workload only sleep.

Author: It is a blanket rejection because the `0.24.xxx` image has the new schema that the older platform doesn't know about.  So from the UI's point of view the config will be `experimental...`, and will allow you to save with that configuration.  It supplies those values to a `0.24.xxx` image that fails validating against the new schema.

Reviewer: Ahh ok, I suppose that makes sense. So that would happen regularly when config changes in any situation like this.

| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resources" | ignore requests to specific resource types  | "pods,resource2,resource3"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-verbs" | ignore requests with specific verbs | "create,verb1,verb2"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resource-verbs" | ignore requests with specific verbs to specific resources |  "myresource.mygroup=create update delete, myresource2.mygroup=create update" |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-resource-names" | ignore requests to specific resources with specific names | "myresource.mygroup=name1 name2,myotherresource.mygroup=name1"  |
| "sleepmode.loft.sh/ignore-user-agents" | ignore specific useragents with trailling wildcard support | "kubectl*,argo,useragent3"  |

:::note
These annotations are to be added to the vCluster workload, e.g. the `StatefulSet` or `Deployment` running the virtual cluster, and any request can be ignored dynamically by adding the header `X-Sleep-Mode-Ignore`.
:::

## Differences and compatibility with the platform

The documentation on this page describes sleep mode for a vCluster not connected to the platform.  The main difference in effect between the two is that

> an agent on the host cluster can shut down the vCluster workload, i.e. the control plane, entirely. A virtual cluster on its own must remain active

Author: I haven't moved over autoDelete yet.  An oversight on my part testing everything else, but that's still under `external.platform` for the moment.  Its a bad user experience and that's on me...

to monitor for any activity that should wake it up.  This also means auto deletion is not available without an agent.  The aim of this and
future versions is to have a single configuration and a seamless transition between the two if you start with vCluster only and connect it to the platform
at a later date.

### Connecting to the platform

When a vCluster, configured for sleep mode, is connected to the platform, it ceases trying to manage its own sleep mode actions, allowing the agent to take over.
This requires compatible versions between vCluster and platform. Below is a table of compatibility and migration.

> | vCluster Version | Platform Version | Compatibility |  Installing an agent | Uninstalling an agent |

Author: I like the idea and tried it out, but it did make the headers too cramped. Instead I added more description to the paragraph that describes the table.

| 0.23.x | 4.2.x | ✅ | Manually update the configuration, moving it from `experimental` to `external.platform`. Translate any durations like `90m` into equivalent seconds e.g. `5400`.  Schema validation prevents configuring both at the same time. | Configuration needs to be manual reverted. |
| 0.24.0 | &lt; 4.3.0 | ❌ | These versions are not compatible, as the vCluster version is ahead of the platform, causing the vcluster creation to be rejected.   | N/A |
| 0.24.0 | 4.3.0 | ✅ | No action required.  Platform reads the unified configuration and take over as though it had been configured for the platform all along. | The annotation `vcluster.loft.sh/agent-installed` needs to be removed from the vCluster configuration secret in the host cluster to inform the vCluster it needs to take over sleep mode again.  That secret's name has the form `vc-config-<vcluster-name>`. |
| 0.24.0+ (future release) | 4.3.0 | ✅ | No action required.  Platform reads the unified configuration and take over as though it had been configured for the platform all along. | No action required, and the vCluster resumes sleep mode on only the workloads, not the control plane. |

:::info

>  - In 0.23.0, the platform won't know how to wake a vCluster that put itself to sleep, so the vCluster should be resumed, before installing the agent to take over.

Author: Could be a warning.  Its more to make sure there are no surprises if people want to try out this feature.  The platform release is more than a month away, hopefully these will be resolved by then and can be removed from the docs.
